*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100050
*FIELD* TI
100050 AARSKOG SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
*FIELD* TX
Grier et al. (1983) reported father and 2 sons with typical Aarskog
syndrome, including short stature, hypertelorism, and shawl scrotum.
They tabulated the findings in 82 previous cases. X-linked recessive
inheritance has repeatedly been suggested (see 305400). The family
reported by Welch (1974) had affected males in 3 consecutive
generations. Thus, there is either genetic heterogeneity or this is an
autosomal dominant with strong sex-influence and possibly ascertainment
bias resulting from use of the shawl scrotum as a main criterion.
Stretchable skin was present in the cases of Grier et al. (1983).

Teebi et al. (1993) reported the case of an affected mother and 4 sons
(including a pair of monozygotic twins) by 2 different husbands. They
suggested that the manifestations were as severe in the mother as in the
sons and that this suggested autosomal dominant inheritance. Actually,
the mother seemed less severely affected, compatible with X-linked
inheritance.

*FIELD* RF
1. Grier, R. E.; Farrington, F. H.; Kendig, R.; Mamunes, P.: Autosomal
dominant inheritance of the Aarskog syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 15:
39-46, 1983.

2. Teebi, A. S.; Rucquoi, J. K.; Meyn, M. S.: Aarskog syndrome: report
of a family with review and discussion of nosology. Am. J. Med. Genet. 46:
501-509, 1993.

3. Welch, J. P.: Elucidation of a 'new' pleiotropic connective tissue
disorder. Birth Defects Orig. Art. Ser. X(10): 138-146, 1974.

*FIELD* CS

Growth:
   Mild to moderate short stature

Head:
   Normocephaly

Hair:
   Widow's peak

Facies:
   Maxillary hypoplasia;
   Broad nasal bridge;
   Anteverted nostrils;
   Long philtrum;
   Broad upper lip;
   Curved linear dimple below the lower lip

Eyes:
   Hypertelorism;
   Ptosis;
   Down-slanted palpebral fissures;
   Ophthalmoplegia;
   Strabismus;
   Hyperopic astigmatism;
   Large cornea

Ears:
   Floppy ears;
   Lop-ears

Mouth:
   Cleft lip/palate

GU:
   Shawl scrotum;
   Saddle-bag scrotum;
   Cryptorchidism

Limbs:
   Brachydactyly;
   Digital contractures;
   Clinodactyly;
   Mild syndactyly;
   Transverse palmar crease;
   Lymphedema of the feet

Joints:
   Ligamentous laxity;
   Osteochondritis dissecans;
   Proximal finger joint hyperextensibility;
   Flexed distal finger joints;
   Genu recurvatum;
   Flat feet

Skin:
   Stretchable skin

Spine:
   Cervical spine hypermobility;
   Odontoid anomaly

Heme:
   Macrocytic anemia;
   Hemochromatosis

GI:
   Hepatomegaly;
   Portal cirrhosis;
   Imperforate anus;
   Rectoperineal fistula

Pulmonary:
   Interstitial pulmonary disease

Thorax:
   Sternal deformity

Inheritance:
   Sex-influenced autosomal dominant form;
   also X-linked form

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
carol: 02/16/2011
alopez: 6/3/1997
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 7/7/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100070
*FIELD* TI
%100070 AORTIC ANEURYSM, FAMILIAL ABDOMINAL, 1; AAA1
;;ANEURYSM, ABDOMINAL AORTIC; AAA;;
ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSM
*FIELD* TX
One locus for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA1) maps to chromosome 19q13.

DESCRIPTION

Abdominal aortic aneurysm is a multifactorial disorder with multiple
genetic and environmental risk factors. The disorder may occur as part
of a heritable syndrome or in isolation (summary by Kuivaniemi et al.,
2003).

- Genetic Heterogeneity of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

Other mapped loci for abdominal aortic aneurysm include AAA2 (609782) on
chromosome 4q31; AAA3 (611891) on chromosome 9p21; and AAA4 (614375) on
chromosome 12q13.3.

CLINICAL FEATURES

Loosemore et al. (1988) described 2 brothers with abdominal aortic
aneurysm at ages 58 and 62 years, whose father died of ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm at the age of 72 years. Four other sibs died
of myocardial infarction at ages 47 to 61 years. Loosemore et al. (1988)
suggested that a deficiency of type III collagen (see 120180) might be
the basis for the aneurysm formation. The proportion of type III
collagen in forearm skin biopsies was cited as accurately reflective of
the proportion in the aorta and was said to have been low in the
brothers.

Ward (1992) looked for association of dilated peripheral arteries with
aortic aneurysmal disease by measuring the diameters of the common
femoral, popliteal, brachial, common carotid, internal carotid, and
external carotid arteries by color-flow duplex scan in 30 control
subjects and 36 patients with aortic aneurysm matched for age, sex,
smoking habits, and hypertension. Mean peripheral artery diameter was
significantly greater in patients with aortic aneurysms than in controls
at all measurement sites. Peripheral artery dilatation was identified at
sites that are seldom, if ever, involved in atherosclerosis. Ward (1992)
concluded that there is a generalized dilating diathesis in aortic
aneurysmal disease that may be unrelated to atherosclerosis.

In the study of Verloes et al. (1995), familial male cases showed a
significantly earlier age at rupture and a greater rupture rate as
compared with sporadic male cases, as well as a tendency (p less than
0.05) towards earlier age of diagnosis.

AAA occurs among approximately 1.5% of the male population older than 50
years of age. Several studies have indicated an increased frequency
among first-degree relatives of patients with AAA. Aneurysms of the
peripheral arteries (femoral, popliteal, and isolated iliac) are less
common than aortic aneurysms (Lawrence et al., 1995), and arteriomegaly
(diffuse aneurysmal disease) is even less common (Hollier et al., 1983).
Peripheral aneurysms and arteriomegaly carry a high risk for
complications such as rupture, embolism, or thrombosis.

INHERITANCE

Tilson and Seashore (1984) reported 50 families in which abdominal
aortic aneurysm had occurred in 2 or more first-degree relatives, mainly
males. In 29 families, multiple sibs (up to 4) were affected; in 2
families, 3 generations were affected; and in 15 families, persons in 2
generations were affected. Three complex pedigrees were observed: one in
which both parents and 3 sons were affected; one in which a man and his
paternal uncle were affected; and one in which a man and his father and
maternal great-uncle were affected. In the 'one-generation' families,
there were 3 with only females affected, including a set of identical
twins. The authors concluded that if a single gene is responsible, it is
likely to be autosomal but that a multigenic mechanism cannot be
excluded.

Clifton (1977) reported 3 affected brothers.

In North Carolina, Johnson et al. (1985) found that white males have a
frequency of abdominal aortic aneurysm about 3 times that in black
males, black females, or white females; all 3 of the latter groups had
about comparable frequencies. Frequency was ascertained by a survey of
autopsies and a survey of abdominal computed tomographic scans in
subjects over the age of 50 years.

Johansen and Koepsell (1986) compared the family histories of 250
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm with those of 250 control
subjects. Among the control subjects, 2.4% reported a first-degree
relative with an aneurysm, compared with 19.2% of the patients with
abdominal aortic aneurysm. This was taken to represent an estimated
11.6-fold increase in abdominal aortic aneurysm risk among persons with
an affected first-degree relative. The authors suggested that
noninvasive screening to detect early abdominal aortic aneurysm may be
warranted in the relatives of affected persons.

By ultrasound screening, Collin et al. (1988) found an abdominal aortic
aneurysm in 5.4% of men aged 65 to 74, and in 2.3% of men in this age
group the aneurysm was 4 cm or more in diameter.

Borkett-Jones et al. (1988) brought to 4 the number of reported sets of
identical twins concordant for abdominal aortic aneurysm. In a 9-year
prospective study of 542 consecutive patients undergoing operation for
abdominal aortic aneurysm, Darling et al. (1989) found that 82 (15.1%)
had a first-degree relative with an aneurysm as compared to 9 (1.8%) of
the control group of 500 patients of similar age and sex without
aneurysmal disease. Patients with familial abdominal aortic aneurysm
were more likely to be women (35% vs 14%), and men with familial
abdominal aortic aneurysm tended to be about 5 years younger than the
women. No significant difference was found between the patients with
nonfamilial and familial abdominal aortic aneurysms in anatomic extent,
multiplicity, associated occlusive disease, or blood type. The risk of
rupture was strongly correlated with familial disease and the presence
of a female member with aneurysm (63% vs 37%). Darling et al. (1989)
suggested the term 'black widow syndrome' because of the grim
significance of the presence of an affected female in the family.

On the basis of a study of first-degree relatives of 91 probands,
Majumder et al. (1991) rejected the nongenetic model and concluded that
the most parsimonious genetic model was that susceptibility to abdominal
aortic aneurysm is determined by a recessive gene at an autosomal
diallelic major locus.

Fitzgerald et al. (1995) assessed the incidence of abdominal aortic
aneurysm in the sibs of 120 patients known to have AAA. Twelve percent
of the sibs were found to have an aneurysm, including 22% of male sibs
but only 3% of female sibs. Male sibs with hypertension were more likely
to have AAA.

In the study of Verloes et al. (1995), relative risk for male sibs of a
male patient was 18. Segregation analysis with the mixed model gave
single gene effect with dominant inheritance as the most likely
explanation for the familial occurrence. The frequency of the morbid
allele was 1:250, and its age-related penetrance was not higher than
0.4.

As part of a review of abdominal aortic aneurysm as a multifactorial
process, Henney (1993) reviewed family studies and the molecular
genetics. In a review focused on surgical aspects, Ernst (1993)
commented that 'there is little support for atherosclerosis as the
unitary cause...several factors appear to have an important role,
including familial clustering...'

Through questionnaire and telephone inquiries, Verloes et al. (1995)
collected family data on 324 probands with abdominal aortic aneurysm and
determined multigenerational pedigrees on 313 families, including 39
with multiple affected patients. There were 276 sporadic cases (264 men;
12 women); 81 cases belonged to multiplex pedigrees (76 men; 5 women).

Baird et al. (1995) collected information from 126 probands with
abdominal aortic aneurysm and 100 controls (cataract surgery patients)
concerning AAA. Of 427 sibs of probands, 19 (4.4%) had probable or
definite AAA, compared with 5 (1.1%) of 451 sibs of controls. The
lifetime cumulative risks of AAA at age 83 were 11.7% and 7.5%,
respectively. The risk of AAA began at an earlier age and increased more
rapidly for probands' sibs than for controls' sibs. The risk comparison,
based on the results of ultrasound screening of 54 geographically
accessible sibs probands and the 100 controls, showed a similar pattern.
AAA was found on ultrasound in 10 sibs of probands, or 19%, compared to
8% of controls.

Lawrence et al. (1998) constructed pedigrees for first-degree relatives
of 140 patients who received the diagnosis of peripheral arterial
aneurysm, arteriomegaly, or AAA from 1988 through 1996 in Salt Lake
City, Utah. Patients with peripheral arterial aneurysm (n = 40) had a
10% (4 of 40) familial incidence rate of an aneurysm, patients with AAA
(n = 86) had a 22% (19 of 86) familial incidence rate, and patients with
arteriomegaly (n = 14) had a 36% (5 of 14) familial incidence rate. AAA
was the aneurysm diagnosed most commonly among first-degree relatives
(86%; 24 of 28). Most aneurysms (85%) occurred among men. Lawrence et
al. (1998) suggested that relatives of patients with AAA, peripheral
arterial aneurysm, or arteriomegaly may be screened by means of a
physical examination for peripheral aneurysmal disease. Screening by
means of ultrasound examination of the aorta should be limited to
first-degree relatives of patients with aortic aneurysms or
arteriomegaly.

Rossaak et al. (2000) cited a familial incidence of 11 to 20% for AAA.

Kuivaniemi et al. (2003) identified 233 families with at least 2
individuals diagnosed with abdominal aortic aneurysms. The families
originated from 9 different nationalities, but all were white. There
were 653 aneurysm patients in these families, with an average of 2.8
cases per family. Most of the families were small, with only 2 affected
individuals. There were, however, 6 families with 6, 3 with 7, and 1
with 8 affected individuals. Most of the probands (82%) and the affected
relatives (77%) were male, and the most common relationship to the
proband was brother. Most of the families (72%) appeared to show an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, whereas in 58 families (25%),
abdominal aortic aneurysms were inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner, and in 8 families, the familial aggregation could be explained
by autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance. In the 66
families where abdominal aortic aneurysms were inherited in a dominant
manner, 141 transmissions of the disease from 1 generation to another
were identified, and male-to-male, male-to-female, female-to-male, and
female-to-female transmissions occurred in 46%, 11%, 32%, and 11%,
respectively. Kuivaniemi et al. (2003) concluded that abdominal aortic
aneurysm is a multifactorial disorder with multiple genetic and
environmental risk factors.

PATHOGENESIS

Newman et al. (1994) and others have pointed to a role of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in end-stage AAA. MMP activity is closely
controlled by the balance of its activators, such as plasmin, and its
inhibitors. A mutation that reduces the transcription of plasminogen
activator inhibitor (PAI1; 173360) would result in an increase in the
activity of tissue plasminogen activator (PLAT; 173370). This in turn
would increase the conversion of inactive plasminogen (173350) to its
active form, plasmin, and increase the zymogen activation of MMPs.
Jean-Claude et al. (1994) observed increased levels of plasmin in AAAs.

It is possible that aneurysms develop due to structural alterations in
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as elastin (130160), collagens,
and proteoglycans. Such alterations in type III collagen (see 120180),
however, have been shown to be rare causes of both abdominal aortic
aneurysms and intracranial aneurysms (see 105800). Another alternative
is that the enzymes degrading the structural molecules contribute to
aneurysm formation. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are connective
tissue-degrading enzymes that could play a role in structural
alterations of the arterial wall through the degradation of collagens
and other extracellular matrix molecules. MMP3 (185250), MMP9 (120361),
and PAI1 are present at increased levels in abdominal aortic aneurysms
(Yoon et al., 1999). Promoters of these genes contain polymorphisms with
alleles that exhibit different transcriptional activities in vitro.

Tromp et al. (2004) determined the relative expression of MMP13 (600108)
in aortic tissue samples from 36 patients who underwent abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair operations and from 20 nonaneurysmal autopsy samples.
MMP13 was expressed in all parts of the aorta, and its expression was
elevated in the aneurysmal sac. In further studies using MMP13-specific
antibody, Tromp et al. (2004) demonstrated that MMP13 protein was
present in the aneurysmal wall.

Yoshimura et al. (2005) observed a high level of phosphorylated JNK
(MAPK8; 601158) in human AAA tissue. By DNA microarray analysis of rat
aortic vascular smooth muscle cells, they demonstrated that Jnk programs
a gene expression pattern that cooperatively enhances degradation of the
extracellular matrix, while suppressing biosynthetic enzymes of the ECM,
such as Lox (153455) and Plod1 (153454). In human monocyte-macrophage
cells and AAA tissue, JNK played a role in MMP9 secretion. Selective
inhibition of Jnk in vivo not only prevented the development of AAA but
also caused regression of established AAA in 2 mouse models. Yoshimura
et al. (2005) concluded that JNK is a proximal signaling molecule in the
pathogenesis of AAA that acts by promoting abnormal ECM metabolism.

There are suggestions from several sources that AAA and atherosclerosis
may be different diseases. In their AAA population, Rossaak et al.
(2000) found an incidence of diabetes mellitus of 6%. They suggested
that this relatively low incidence in patients with AAA contrasted with
that in atherosclerotic disease and lent support to the notion that
these 2 disorders are indeed distinct. The apparent association of a
PAI1 polymorphism (4G/5G; 173360.0002) with familial AAA (see MOLECULAR
GENETICS) was another observation that questioned the idea that
atherosclerosis causes AAAs: whereas the 4G variant of PAI1 shows a
protective role in AAA, it is undesirable in the context of coronary
artery disease and atherosclerosis (Harris, 2001).

MAPPING

Shibamura et al. (2004) performed a whole-genome scan of AAA using
affected relative-pair (ARP) linkage analysis that included covariates
to allow for genetic heterogeneity. They found strong evidence of
linkage (lod = 4.64) to a region near marker D19S433 at 51.88 cM on
chromosome 19 with 36 families (75 ARPs) when including sex and the
number of affected first-degree relatives of the proband as covariates.
They then genotyped 83 additional families for the same markers and
typed additional markers for all families and obtained a lod score of
4.75 with sex, number of affected first-degree relatives, and their
interaction as covariates, near marker D19S416 (58.69 cM).

- Pending Confirmation

Elmore et al. (2009) conducted a genomewide association study in 123 AAA
cases and 112 controls matched for age, sex, and smoking history, and
identified 4 SNPs associated with AAA in strong LD within a haplotype
block on chromosome 3p12.3. One of the SNPs from this region, dbSNP
rs7635818, was genotyped in 502 AAA cases and 736 controls (p = 0.017)
and a replication set of 448 cases and 410 controls (p = 0.013; combined
p = 0.0028 and combined OR = 1.33); analysis in the subset of 391 cases
and 241 controls with a smoking history showed an even stronger
association (p = 0.00041; OR, 1.80). Elmore et al. (2009) noted that the
AAA-associated region is located approximately 200 kbp upstream of the
CNTN3 gene (601325) transcription start site.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Yoon et al. (1999) performed association studies using polymorphisms in
the MMP3 (185250), MMP9 (120361), and PAI1 (173360) genes and DNA
isolated from 47 AAA patients, 57 intracranial aneurysm (IA) patients,
and 174 controls, all from Finland. The frequency of the 5A MMP3 allele
(185250.0001) was somewhat higher in the AAA than in the control group
(corrected p = 0.0609), whereas the MMP3 allele frequencies in the IA
group did not differ from those of the controls. These findings
suggested that the transcriptionally more active 5A MMP3 allele might be
a genetic risk factor for AAA among Finns. The findings were in
agreement with previous studies demonstrating higher levels of MMP3
expression in AAA than in control tissues. Yoon et al. (1999) found that
PAI1 and MMP9 genotypes, including the PAI1 4G/5G polymorphism
(173360.0002), did not associate with aneurysms.

Noting that the 5G variant of the PAI1 4G/5G polymorphism is associated
with less inhibition of the plasminogen activators and, consequently,
increased conversion of plasminogen to plasmin and increased activation
of MMPs, Rossaak et al. (2000) studied the ratios of the 4G:5G genotypes
in 190 patients with AAA, including 39 patients with strong family
histories, and 163 controls, and found that 26% of patients with
familial AAA were homozygous 5G compared with 13% of the control
population. The 4G allele frequency was 0.47 in the familial AAAs,
compared with 0.62 in the nonfamilial patients (P = 0.02) and 0.61 in
the control population (p = 0.03).

Histologically, AAAs are characterized by signs of chronic inflammation,
destructive remodeling of the extracellular matrix, and depletion of
vascular smooth muscle cells (Steinmetz et al., 2003). Ogata et al.
(2005) hypothesized that genes involved in these events could harbor
changes and make individuals more susceptible to aneurysms. They
analyzed 387 Caucasian individuals with AAA and 425 controls for 14
polymorphisms in 13 candidate genes, and found significant association
between variation in the TIMP1 gene (305370) and AAA in males without a
family history (p = 0.0047 for nt+434 and p = 0.015 for dbSNP
rs2070584).

Baas et al. (2010) performed an association study of SNPs in the
TGF-beta receptor genes TGFBR1 (190181) and TGFBR2 (190182) and AAA in a
Dutch population. In the stage 1 analysis of 376 cases and 648 controls,
3 of the 4 TGFBR1 SNPs and 9 of the 28 TGFBR2 SNPs had a p value of less
than 0.07. Genotyping of these SNPs in an independent cohort of 360
cases and 376 controls in stage 2 confirmed association (p less than
0.05) for the same allele of 1 SNP in TGFBR1 and 2 SNPs in TGFBR2. Joint
analysis of the 736 cases and 1,024 controls showed statistically
significant associations of these SNPs, which sustained after proper
correction for multiple testing (TGFBR1 dbSNP rs1626340, OR = 1.32, 95%
CI 1.11-1.56, p = 0.001; TGFBR2 dbSNP rs1036095, OR = 1.32, 95% CI
1.12-1.54, p = 0.001; dbSNP rs4522809, OR = 1.28, 95% CI 1.12-1.46, p =
0.0004). Baas et al. (2010) concluded that genetic variation in TGFBR1
and TGFBR2 associate with AAA in the Dutch population.

*FIELD* SA
Norrgard et al. (1985); Norrgard et al. (1984)
*FIELD* RF
1. Baas, A. F.; Medic, J.; van't Slot, R.; de Kovel, C. G.; Zhernakova,
A.; Geelkerken, R. H.; Kranendonk, S. E.; van Sterkenburg, S. M.;
Grobbee, D. E.; Boll, A. P.; Wijmenga, C.; Blankensteijn, J. D.; Ruigrok,
Y. M.: Association of the TGF-beta receptor genes with abdominal
aortic aneurysm. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 240-244, 2010.

2. Baird, P. A.; Sadovnick, A. D.; Yee, I. M. L.; Cole, C. W.; Cole,
L.: Sibling risks of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Lancet 346: 601-604,
1995.

3. Borkett-Jones, H. J.; Stewart, G.; Chilvers, A. S.: Abdominal
aortic aneurysms in identical twins. J. Roy. Soc. Med. 81: 471-472,
1988.

4. Clifton, M. A.: Familial abdominal aortic aneurysms. Brit. J.
Surg. 64: 765-766, 1977.

5. Collin, J.; Araujo, L.; Walton, J.; Lindsell, D.: Oxford screening
programme for abdominal aortic aneurysm in men aged 65 to 74 years. Lancet 332:
613-615, 1988. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Darling, R. C., III; Brewster, D. C.; Darling, R. C.; LaMuraglia,
G. M.; Moncure, A. C.; Cambria, R. P.; Abbott, W. M.: Are familial
abdominal aortic aneurysms different? J. Vasc. Surg. 10: 39-43,
1989.

7. Elmore, J. R.; Obmann, M. A.; Kuivaniemi, H.; Tromp, G.; Gerhard,
G. S.; Franklin, D. P.; Boddy, A. M.; Carey, D. J.: Identification
of a genetic variant associated with abdominal aortic aneurysms on
chromosome 3p12.3 by genome wide association. J. Vasc. Surg. 49:
1525-1531, 2009.

8. Ernst, C. B.: Abdominal aortic aneurysm. New Eng. J. Med. 328:
1167-1172, 1993.

9. Fitzgerald, P.; Ramsbottom, D.; Burke, P.; Grace, P.; McAnen, O.;
Croke, D. T.; Collins, P.; Johnson, A.; Bouchier-Hayes, D.: Abdominal
aortic aneurysm in the Irish population. Brit. J. Surg. 82: 483-486,
1995.

10. Harris, E. L.: Personal Communication. Dunedin, New Zealand 
11/27/2001.

11. Henney, A. M.: Abdominal aortic aneurysm: molecular genetics. Lancet 341:
216-217, 1993.

12. Hollier, L. H.; Stanson, A. W.; Gloviczki, P.; Pairolero, P. C.;
Joyce, J. W.; Bernatz, P. E.; Cherry, K. J.: Arteriomegaly: classification
and morbid implications of diffuse aneurysmal disease. Surgery 93:
700-708, 1983.

13. Jean-Claude, J.; Newman, K. M.; Li, H.; Gregory, A. K.; Tilson,
M. D.: Possible key role for plasmin in the pathogenesis of abdominal
aortic aneurysms. Surgery 116: 472-478, 1994.

14. Johansen, K.; Koepsell, T.: Familial tendency for abdominal aortic
aneurysms. JAMA 256: 1934-1936, 1986.

15. Johnson, G., Jr.; Avery, A.; McDougal, E. G.; Burnham, S. J.;
Keagy, B. A.: Aneurysms of the abdominal aorta: incidence in blacks
and whites in North Carolina. Arch. Surg. 120: 1138-1140, 1985.

16. Kuivaniemi, H.; Shibamura, H.; Arthur, C.; Berguer, R.; Cole,
C. W.; Juvonen, T.; Kline, R. A.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G.; Norrgard,
O.; Pals, G.; Powell, J. T.; Rainio, P.; Sakalihasan, N.; van Vlijmen-van
Keulen, C.; Verloes, A.; Tromp, G.: Familial abdominal aortic aneurysms:
collection of 233 multiplex families. J. Vasc. Surg. 37: 340-345,
2003.

17. Lawrence, P. F.; Lorenzo-Rivero, S.; Lyon, J. L.: The incidence
of iliac, femoral, and popliteal artery aneurysms in hospitalized
patients. J.  Vasc. Surg. 22: 409-415, 1995.

18. Lawrence, P. F.; Wallis, C.; Dobrin, P. B.; Bhirangi, K.; Gugliuzza,
N.; Galt, S.; Kraiss, L.: Peripheral aneurysms and arteriomegaly:
is there a familial pattern? J. Vasc. Surg. 28: 599-605, 1998.

19. Loosemore, T. M.; Child, A. H.; Dormandy, J. A.: Familial abdominal
aortic aneurysms. J. Roy. Soc. Med. 81: 472-473, 1988.

20. Majumder, P. P.; St. Jean, P. L.; Ferrell, R. E.; Webster, M.
W.; Steed, D. L.: On the inheritance of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 48: 164-170, 1991.

21. Newman, K. M.; Malon, A. M.; Shin, R. D.; Scholes, J. V.; Ramey,
W. G.; Tilson, M. D.: Matrix metalloproteinases in abdominal aortic
aneurysm: characterization, purification, and their possible sources. Connect.
Tissue Res. 30: 265-276, 1994.

22. Norrgard, O.; Angquist, K.-A.; Johnson, O.: Familial aortic aneurysms:
serum concentrations of triglyceride, cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol
and (VLDL + LDL)-cholesterol. Brit. J. Surg. 72: 113-116, 1985.

23. Norrgard, O.; Rais, O.; Angquist, K. A.: Familial occurrence
of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Surgery 95: 650-656, 1984.

24. Ogata, T.; Shibamura, H.; Tromp, G.; Sinha, M.; Goddard, K. A.
B.; Sakalihasan, N.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G. L.; Arthur, C.; Sueda,
T.; Land, S.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Genetic analysis of polymorphisms in
biologically relevant candidate genes in patients with abdominal aortic
aneurysms. J. Vasc. Surg. 41: 1036-1042, 2005.

25. Rossaak, J. I.; van Rij, A. M.; Jones, G. T.; Harris, E. L.:
Association of the 4G/5G polymorphism in the promoter region of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 with abdominal aortic aneurysms. J. Vasc. Surg. 31:
1026-1032, 2000.

26. Shibamura, H.; Olson, J. M.; van Vlijmen-van Keulen, C.; Buxbaum,
S. G.; Dudek, D. M.; Tromp, G.; Ogata, T.; Skunca, M.; Sakalihasan,
N.; Pals, G.; Limet, R.; MacKean, G. L.; Defawe, O.; Verloes, A.;
Arthur, C.; Lossing, A. G.; Burnett, M.; Sueda, T.; Kuivaniemi, H.
: Genome scan for familial abdominal aortic aneurysm using sex and
family history as covariates suggests genetic heterogeneity and identifies
linkage to chromosome 19q13. Circulation 109: 2103-2108, 2004.

27. Steinmetz, E. F.; Buckley, C.; Thompson, R. W.: Prospects for
the medical management of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc. Endovascular
Surg. 37: 151-163, 2003.

28. Tilson, M. D.; Seashore, M. R.: Fifty families with abdominal
aortic aneurysms in two or more first-order relatives. Am. J. Surg. 147:
551-553, 1984.

29. Tromp, G.; Gatalica, Z.; Skunca, M.; Berguer, R.; Siegel, T.;
Kline, R. A.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Elevated expression of matrix metalloproteinase-13
in abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann. Vasc. Surg. 18: 414-420, 2004.

30. Verloes, A.; Sakalihasan, N.; Koulischer, L.; Limet, R.: Aneurysms
of the abdominal aorta: familial and genetic aspects in three hundred
thirteen pedigrees. J. Vas. Surg. 21: 646-655, 1995.

31. Ward, A. S.: Aortic aneurysmal disease: a generalized dilating
diathesis? Arch. Surg. 127: 990-991, 1992.

32. Yoon, S.; Tromp, G.; Vongpunsawad, S.; Ronkainen, A.; Juvonen,
T.; Kuivaniemi, H.: Genetic analysis of MMP3, and PAI-1 in Finnish
patients with abdominal aortic or intracranial aneurysms. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 265: 563-568, 1999.

33. Yoshimura, K.; Aoki, H.; Ikeda, Y.; Fujii, K.; Akiyama, N.; Furutani,
A.; Hoshii, Y.; Tanaka, N.; Ricci, R.; Ishihara, T.; Esato, K.; Hamano,
K.; Matsuzaki, M.: Regression of abdominal aortic aneurysm by inhibition
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Nature Med. 11: 1330-1338, 2005.

*FIELD* CS

Vascular:
   Abdominal aortic aneurysm;
   Generalized dilating diathesis

Misc:
   Estimated 11.6-fold increase among persons with an affected first-degree
   relative

Inheritance:
   Autosomal dominant vs. recessive at an autosomal major locus or multifactorial;
   COL3A1 gene (120180.0004) mutations cause about 2%

*FIELD* CN
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/20/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/25/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/1999
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 5/12/1995

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
terry: 02/02/2012
alopez: 1/11/2012
terry: 12/20/2011
carol: 12/6/2011
terry: 12/2/2011
carol: 9/30/2009
carol: 9/25/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
terry: 1/7/2009
alopez: 3/13/2008
terry: 3/10/2008
wwang: 3/21/2006
terry: 3/20/2006
carol: 12/13/2005
alopez: 12/13/2005
alopez: 12/12/2005
terry: 12/2/2005
terry: 6/27/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
alopez: 1/8/2002
alopez: 1/7/2002
terry: 12/14/2001
carol: 3/28/2000
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/20/1999
carol: 12/28/1998
carol: 12/15/1998
terry: 11/11/1997
terry: 11/10/1997
alopez: 7/9/1997
mark: 10/2/1996
terry: 10/24/1995
mark: 7/11/1995
warfield: 4/6/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 7/13/1993

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100100
*FIELD* TI
#100100 ABDOMINAL MUSCLES, ABSENCE OF, WITH URINARY TRACT ABNORMALITY AND
CRYPTORCHIDISM
;;PRUNE BELLY SYNDROME;;
EAGLE-BARRETT SYNDROME; EGBRS
*FIELD* TX
A number sign (#) is used with this entry because of evidence that
absence of abdominal muscles with urinary tract abnormality and
cryptorchidism can be caused by homozygous mutation in the CHRM3 gene
(118494) on chromosome 1q43.

DESCRIPTION

In its rare complete form, 'prune belly' syndrome comprises megacystis
(massively enlarged bladder) with disorganized detrusor muscle,
cryptorchidism, and thin abdominal musculature with overlying lax skin
(summary by Weber et al., 2011).

CLINICAL FEATURES

This condition was first described by Frolich (1839). The appellation
'prune belly syndrome' is descriptive because the intestinal pattern is
evident through the thin, lax, protruding abdominal wall in the infant
(Osler, 1901). (Osler did not use the term 'prune belly.' His article on
this subject and one 'on a family form of recurring epistaxis,
associated with multiple telangiectases of the skin and mucous
membranes'--see 187300--appeared successively in the November 1901 issue
of the Johns Hopkins Hospital Bulletin. Osler wrote: 'In the summer of
1897 a case of remarkable distension of the abdomen was admitted to the
wards, with greatly distended bladder, and on my return in September,
Dr. Futcher, knowing that I would be interested in it, sent for the
child.') The full syndrome probably occurs only in males (Williams and
Burkholder, 1967).

A possibly related syndrome was described in a single patient by Texter
and Murphy (1968). The triad consisted of absence of the right testis,
kidney, and rectus abdominis muscle.

King and Prescott (1978) presented evidence to support the suggestion
that the maldevelopment of the abdominal musculature and abdominal
laxity are secondary phenomena, the primary event being marked
distention of the abdomen in the fetal period because of obstruction of
the urinary tract. Likewise, Pagon et al. (1979) suggested that the
abdominal muscle deficiency is secondary to fetal abdominal distention
of various causes, most often perhaps, urethral obstruction with
enlarged bladder. 'Prune belly' occurs, in the main, as a consequence of
posterior urethral valves; thus the predominance as a male-limited
multifactorial trait.

Gaboardi et al. (1982) reported 2 brothers and a sister with prune belly
syndrome with bilateral hydronephrosis, megaureter and megabladder, but
no urethral stenosis.

A better prognosis than is usually thought to obtain was suggested by
the series of 19 patients reported by Burke et al. (1969).

Greskovich and Nyberg (1988) gave a review in which they stated
incorrectly that the term prune belly syndrome was coined by Osler.

Dorst and Seidel (1982) suggested Eagle-Barrett syndrome as a 'kinder
and more appropriate designation' than prune belly syndrome. Eagle and
Barrett (1950) described 9 cases of congenital deficiency of abdominal
musculature with associated genitourinary abnormalities. They pointed
out that genitourinary symptoms are often not present and that the
obstructive manifestations in the genitourinary tract must be searched
for and corrected at the earliest possible moment. Eagle and Barrett
(1950) stated that 42 cases had been reported before their report of 9
cases. Every case except 1 was in a male.

Smolkin et al. (2008) reported a male infant born with protrusion of
both sides of the abdomen, consistent with prune belly; mild scoliosis,
unilateral auricular sinus, bilateral cryptorchidism with normal-sized
penis, and right-sided congenital hip dislocation were also noted. Chest
x-ray showed multiple segmentation defects, including 11 pairs of ribs,
bilateral cervical ribs, and T8 to T12 and S3 hemivertebrae with
resultant scoliosis. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated absence of upper
abdominal muscles, liver in the right flank protrusion and both spleen
and bowel in the left flank protrusion; the right kidney was normal, but
the left kidney was absent, and there were normal-appearing
intraabdominal testes. Smolkin et al. (2008) noted that their patient
with prune belly syndrome had 2 previously unreported malformations,
auricular sinus and hemivertebrae, and suggested that on the basis of
the heterogeneous phenotype and the as-yet-unknown etiology, the
designation be changed to 'prune belly association.'

Weber et al. (2005) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 3
brothers had posterior urethral valves (PUVs) and 2 other brothers had
PUV in association with prune belly syndrome; 1 of the latter boys died
of urosepsis. The affected sibs had dysfunctional or areflexic bladders
with vesicoureteral reflux and variably decreased glomerular filtration
rates. The most severely affected brother had hydronephrosis, severe
dysplasia of the right kidney, cryptorchidism, and prune belly
abnormalities of the abdominal wall. There was also a sister who had
normal renal function and no urinary tract abnormalities except for
minimal left lower pole calyx hypoplasia. Abdominal ultrasound in both
parents revealed no abnormalities of the kidneys or urinary tract. No
associated extrarenal abnormalities were observed in any of the family
members. Weber et al. (2011) restudied the Turkish family originally
described by Weber et al. (2005), into which a sixth affected brother
with a malformed bladder had been born. Examination of affected
individuals also revealed bilaterally impaired pupillary constriction to
light and dry mouths.

INHERITANCE

Autosomal recessive inheritance is suggested by some reports. For
example, in Lebanon, where the rate of consanguinity is high, Afifi et
al. (1972) described an affected offspring of first-cousin parents.

Garlinger and Ott (1974) described 2 affected brothers in 1 family and 2
affected male cousins in a second, and found 3 other reports of affected
sibs, 2 of affected cousins and 1 of concordant male twins. In the first
family the parents were nonconsanguineous. In the second family the
affected boys' mothers were half sisters; they had different maternal
grandmothers.

Ramasamy et al. (2005) reported 2 brothers with deficient abdominal wall
musculature and bilateral undescended testes, neither of whom had
dilation of the urinary tract. There was no earlier family history of
prune belly syndrome. Ramasamy et al. (2005) reviewed reported cases of
'complete' familial prune belly syndrome, in which the full clinical
triad was present, noting that 28% of patients were female in the
familial form of the syndrome compared to only 5% of nonfamilial cases.
They stated that their findings strongly supported an autosomal
recessive, sex-influenced mode of inheritance.

POPULATION GENETICS

In British Columbia, Baird and MacDonald (1981) found that the incidence
of prune belly syndrome between 1964 and 1978 was 1 in 29,231 live
births.

MAPPING

Weber et al. (2005) performed genomewide linkage analysis in a
consanguineous Turkish family in which 5 brothers had posterior urethral
valve/prune belly syndrome and identified a 35-cM region of homozygosity
on chromosome 1q41-q44, with a maximum multipoint lod score of Z(max) =
3.134 (theta = 0) for the SNPs dbSNP rs158724-dbSNP rs720163. A second
alternative locus was identified on chromosome 11p11 with a lod score of
Z(max) = 3.61 (theta = 0). Equal significance for either locus was
obtained when the affection status of the sibs' sister was set to
'unknown' (lod score of Z(max) = 3.01; theta = 0).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a consanguineous Turkish family with posterior urethral valve/prune
belly syndrome, previously studied by Weber et al. (2005), Weber et al.
(2011) performed exon capture and massively parallel sequencing and
identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the CHRM3 gene on
chromosome 1q43 (118494.0001) that segregated with disease and was not
found in 374 Turkish control chromosomes.

*FIELD* SA
Burton and Dillard (1984); Harley et al. (1972); Lee  (1977); Monie
and Monie (1979); Riccardi and Grum (1977); Roberts  (1956); Welch
and Kearney (1974); Woodhouse et al. (1982)
*FIELD* RF
1. Afifi, A. K.; Rebeiz, J.; Mire, J.; Andonian, S. J.; Der Kaloustian,
V. M.: The myopathology of the prune belly syndrome. J. Neurol.
Sci. 15: 153-166, 1972.

2. Baird, P. A.; MacDonald, E. C.: An epidemiologic study of congenital
malformations of the anterior abdominal wall in more than half a million
consecutive live births. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 470-478, 1981.

3. Burke, E. C.; Shin, M. H.; Kelalis, P. P.: Prune belly syndrome:
clinical findings and survival. Am. J. Dis. Child. 117: 668-671,
1969.

4. Burton, B. K.; Dillard, R. G.: Prune belly syndrome: observations
supporting the hypothesis of abdominal overdistention. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 17: 669-672, 1984.

5. Dorst, J. P.; Seidel, H. M.: Eagle-Barrett syndrome. (Letter) Pediatrics 69:
504 only, 1982.

6. Eagle, J. F., Jr.; Barrett, G. S.: Congenital deficiency of abdominal
musculature with associated genitourinary abnormalities: a syndrome:
report of nine cases. Pediatrics 6: 721-736, 1950.

7. Frolich, F.: Der Mangel der Muskeln, insbesondere der Seitenbauchmuskeln. 
Dissertation: Wurzburg (pub.)  1839.

8. Gaboardi, F.; Sterpa, A.; Thiebat, E.; Cornali, R.; Manfredi, M.;
Bianchi, C.; Giacomoni, M. A.; Bertagnoli, L.: Prune-belly syndrome:
report of three siblings. Helv. Paediat. Acta 37: 283-288, 1982.

9. Garlinger, P.; Ott, J.: Prune belly syndrome: possible genetic
implications. Birth Defects Orig. Art. Ser. X(8): 173-180, 1974.

10. Greskovich, F. J., III; Nyberg, L. M., Jr.: The prune belly syndrome:
a review of its etiology, defects, treatment and prognosis. J. Urol. 140:
707-712, 1988.

11. Harley, L. M.; Chen, Y.; Rattner, W. H.: Prune belly syndrome. J.
Urol. 108: 174-176, 1972.

12. King, C. R.; Prescott, G.: Pathogenesis of the prune-belly anomaly. J.
Pediat. 93: 273-274, 1978.

13. Lee, S. M.: Prune-belly syndrome in a 54-year-old man. JAMA 237:
2216-2217, 1977.

14. Monie, I. W.; Monie, B. J.: Prune-belly syndrome and fetal ascites. Teratology 19:
111-117, 1979.

15. Osler, W.: Congenital absence of the abdominal muscles with distended
and hypertrophied urinary bladder. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 12:
331-333, 1901.

16. Pagon, R. A.; Smith, D. W.; Shepard, T. H.: Urethral obstruction
malformation complex: a cause of abdominal deficiency and the 'prune
belly'. J. Pediat. 94: 900-906, 1979.

17. Ramasamy, R.; Haviland, M.; Woodard, J. R.; Barone, J. G.: Patterns
of inheritance in familial prune belly syndrome. Urology 65: 1227
only, 2005.

18. Riccardi, V. M.; Grum, C. M.: The prune belly anomaly: heterogeneity
and superficial X-linkage mimicry. J. Med. Genet. 14: 266-270, 1977.

19. Roberts, P.: Congenital absence of the abdominal muscles with
associated abnormalities of the genito-urinary tract. Arch. Dis.
Child. 31: 236-239, 1956.

20. Smolkin, T.; Soudack, M.; Goldstein, I.; Sujov, P.; Makhoul, I.
R.: Prune belly syndrome: expanding the phenotype. Clin. Dysmorph. 17:
133-135, 2008.

21. Texter, J. H.; Murphy, G. P.: The right-sided syndrome: congenital
absence of the right testis, kidney and rectus: urologic diagnosis
and treatment. Johns Hopkins Med. J. 122: 224-228, 1968.

22. Weber, S.; Mir, S.; Schlingmann, K. P.; Nurnberg, G.; Becker,
C.; Kara, P. E.; Ozkayin, N.; Konrad, M.; Nurnberg, P.; Schaefer,
F.: Gene locus ambiguity in posterior urethral valves/prune-belly
syndrome. Pediat. Nephrol. 20: 1036-1042, 2005.

23. Weber, S.; Thiele, H.; Mir, S.; Toliat, M. R.; Sozeri, B.; Reutter,
H.; Draaken, M.; Ludwig, M.; Altmuller, J.; Frommolt, P.; Stuart,
H. M.; Ranjzad, P.; and 12 others: Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
M3 mutation causes urinary bladder disease and a prune-belly-like
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 668-674, 2011.

24. Welch, K. J.; Kearney, G. P.: Abdominal musculature deficiency
syndrome: prune belly. J. Urol. 111: 693-700, 1974.

25. Williams, D. I.; Burkholder, G. V.: The prune belly syndrome. J.
Urol. 98: 244-251, 1967.

26. Woodhouse, C. R. J.; Ransley, P. G.; Innes-Williams, D.: Prune
belly syndrome--report of 47 cases. Arch. Dis. Child. 57: 856-859,
1982.

*FIELD* CS
INHERITANCE:
   Autosomal recessive

HEAD AND NECK:
   [Eyes];
   Impaired pupillary constriction to light;
   [Mouth];
   Dry mouth

CARDIOVASCULAR:
   [Heart];
   Congenital heart defect;
   Patent ductus arteriosus

CHEST:
   [Ribs, sternum, clavicles, and scapulae];
   Flared ribs;
   Pectus excavatum;
   Pectus carinatum

ABDOMEN:
   [External features];
   Absent abdominal musculature;
   Visible intestinal pattern (so-called 'prune belly');
   Thin, lax, protruding abdominal wall;
   [Gastrointestinal];
   Imperforate anus

GENITOURINARY:
   [Internal genitalia, male];
   Cryptorchidism;
   [Kidneys];
   Hydronephrosis;
   [Ureters];
   Posterior urethral valves;
   Hydroureter;
   [Bladder];
   Distended bladder;
   Fetal urinary tract obstruction

SKELETAL:
   [Pelvis];
   Congenital hip dislocation;
   [Feet];
   Clubfoot

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
   [Skin];
   Wrinkled abdominal skin

PRENATAL MANIFESTATIONS:
   [Amniotic fluid];
   Oligohydramnios

MOLECULAR BASIS:
   Caused by mutation in the muscarinic cholinergic receptor-3 gene 
   (CHRM3, 118494.0001)

*FIELD* CN
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/02/2011

*FIELD* CD
John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

*FIELD* ED
joanna: 12/02/2011
joanna: 9/12/2011
joanna: 2/14/2011
joanna: 1/24/2011
joanna: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
alopez: 9/6/2007

*FIELD* CN
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/8/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/2007

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
joanna: 12/19/2011
carol: 12/6/2011
terry: 12/2/2011
terry: 6/3/2009
wwang: 5/20/2009
terry: 5/8/2009
mgross: 3/4/2009
joanna: 3/3/2009
carol: 7/3/2008
alopez: 9/6/2007
terry: 9/4/2007
carol: 11/18/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
dholmes: 10/6/1997
terry: 2/13/1997
carol: 7/12/1996
mimadm: 4/18/1994
carol: 2/13/1994
carol: 8/25/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/4/1990

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100200
*FIELD* TI
100200 ABDUCENS PALSY
*FIELD* TX
This is a form of hereditary strabismus. Affected persons in 2 or more
generations have been reported (Chavasse, 1938; Francois, 1961). Nuclear
aplasia has been found in some cases (Phillips et al., 1932). Abducens
palsy also occurs as part of the Moebius syndrome (157900).

*FIELD* RF
1. Chavasse, F. B.: The ocular palsies. Trans. Ophthal. Soc. U.K. 58:
493 only, 1938.

2. Francois, J.: Heredity in Ophthalmology.  St. Louis: C. V. Mosby
(pub.)  1961. P. 280.

3. Phillips, W. H.; Dirion, J. K.; Graves, G. O.: Congenital bilateral
palsy of abducens. Arch. Ophthal. 8: 355-364, 1932.

*FIELD* CS

Eyes:
   Abducens palsy;
   Strabismus

Neuro:
   Abducens nucleus aplasia

Inheritance:
   Autosomal dominant

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
terry: 05/13/2010
terry: 3/23/2010
davew: 8/15/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100300
*FIELD* TI
#100300 ADAMS-OLIVER SYNDROME 1; AOS1
;;AOS;;
ABSENCE DEFECT OF LIMBS, SCALP, AND SKULL;;
CONGENITAL SCALP DEFECTS WITH DISTAL LIMB REDUCTION ANOMALIES;;
APLASIA CUTIS CONGENITA WITH TERMINAL TRANSVERSE LIMB DEFECTS
APLASIA CUTIS CONGENITA, CONGENITAL HEART DEFECT, AND FRONTONASAL
CYSTS, INCLUDED
*FIELD* TX
A number sign (#) is used with this entry because of evidence that an
autosomal dominant form of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS1) is caused by
heterozygous mutation in the ARHGAP31 gene (610911) on chromosome 3q13.

DESCRIPTION

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is characterized by the congenital absence
of skin, known as 'aplasia cutis congenita,' usually limited to the
scalp vertex, and transverse limb defects. The clinical features are
highly variable and can also include vascular defects, congenital
cardiac malformations, and other abnormalities (summary by Verdyck et
al., 2006).

Sybert (1985) and Frieden (1986) provided reviews.

- Genetic Heterogeneity of Adams-Oliver Syndrome

An autosomal recessive form of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS2; 614219) is
caused by mutation in the DOCK6 gene (614194) on chromosome 19p13.2.

Another autosomal dominant form of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS3; 614814)
is caused by mutation in the RBPJ gene (147183) on chromosome 4p15.

CLINICAL FEATURES

Adams and Oliver (1945) reported a boy with absence of the lower
extremities below the midcalf region, absence of all digits and some of
the metacarpals of the right hand, a denuded ulcerated area on the
vertex of the scalp present at birth, and a bony defect of the skull
underlying the scalp defect. The skin and skull lesions were similar to
those of aplasia cutis congenita (ACC; 107600). The proband had 4
unaffected brothers and a sister and brother with identical defects of
limbs, scalp, and skull. The father was born with absence of toes 2-5 on
the left foot, short terminal phalanges of all fingers, and a scalp
defect. The father was 1 of 10 children, 3 of whom had defects of the
extremities. The father's father was said to have had short fingers.
Whitley and Gorlin (1991) provided a follow-up on the family studied by
Adams and Oliver (1945); the disorder had been transmitted to a member
of a fourth generation. In the intervening 45 years, the original
proband had survived to adulthood and was employed, using orthotic
devices for lower limb defects. He reported good quality of life and no
other medical problems.

Scribanu and Temtamy (1975) described a family with aplasia cutis
congenita with terminal transverse defects of the limbs. The proband was
a 3-year-old boy with striking cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita
(CMTC; 219250). There was variable expressivity and reduced penetrance.

Toriello et al. (1988) described cutis marmorata telangiectatica
congenita in a child with the Adams-Oliver syndrome. He also had
pulmonary hypertension in association with pulmonary vein stenosis and
died at age 4 months of cardiopulmonary arrest. The mother had CMTC
without other features.

Kuster et al. (1988) described 10 individuals with AOS, 7 of them in 2
families and 3 sporadic. The most common features included absence of
middle and distal phalanges, brachydactyly, malformed toes, syndactyly
of the toes, nail dysplasia, hairless scalp patches, and osseous skull
defects. One child had tetralogy of Fallot. The authors identified 11
affected families and 19 sporadic cases that had been reported and found
great variability of limb anomalies, ranging from brachydactyly to
absent lower limbs. The family data suggested autosomal dominant
inheritance.

Santos et al. (1989) reported a girl with scalp ACC and no distal limb
anomalies, who also had aortic coarctation and ventricular septal
defect; her mother had ACC and upper and lower limb reductions, and her
maternal grandmother had typical ACC. The authors suggested that
congenital heart disease could be a component manifestation of AOS.

Jaeggi et al. (1990) reported an affected mother and child as well as a
third sporadic case. Among the 31 reported patients with the full
syndrome, major hemorrhage from the scalp defect occurred in 10, with 2
fatalities. Local infection was noted in 7 babies, with 1 case of fatal
meningitis. Only 30% of the patients had surgical treatment of their
scalp defects by skin grafting.

Whitley and Gorlin (1991) found reports of 81 cases in 32 families with
approximately equal distribution between males and females. The limb
defects were usually asymmetric and ranged from hypoplastic nails to
absence of a hand or foot. Vertical transmission in at least 8 families
was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. Despite large
defects of the cranium, the authors stated that central nervous system
abnormalities had not been found in this disorder and intellectual
development appeared to be normal.

David et al. (1991) reported congenital heart disease in association
with the features of Adams-Oliver syndrome. This brought to 6 the number
of cases of such an association. Ishikiriyama et al. (1992) added to the
description of the association and suggested that ventricular septal
defect, including tetralogy of Fallot, may be the predominant type of
congenital heart defect in the Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Fryns et al. (1992) reported a 6-month-old, developmentally retarded
male with a congenital scalp defect associated with a ventricular septal
defect and valvular pulmonary stenosis. Hands and feet were relatively
small with short distal phalanges and small nails of the fifth fingers.
Brain CT scan showed marked cerebellar hypoplasia and vermis agenesis.
They noted that Paltzik and Aiello (1985) had reported scalp defect in
association with ventricular septal defect and pulmonary stenosis.

Dallapiccola et al. (1992) observed aplasia cutis congenita and
coarctation of the aorta in a mother and son. Both had coarctectomy, at
age 14 years and 5 months, respectively. The aortic valve was bicuspid
in the son.

On the basis of a sporadic case in a 10-year-old male, Chitayat et al.
(1992) suggested that acrania is a severe form of aplasia cutis
congenita and is within the spectrum of Adams-Oliver syndrome. In
acrania, the flat bones of the cranial vault are absent, whereas the
bones at the base of the skull are normal.

Farrell et al. (1993) described a sporadic case of AOS in a male infant.
In addition to typical manifestations, he had atrial septal defect,
chylothorax, and chronic juvenile myelogenous leukemia which was
diagnosed at 9 months. Review of the literature (102 cases) showed that
78% of patients had defects of lower limbs and 59% had defects of upper
limbs. To avoid ascertainment bias, Farrell et al. (1993) excluded
propositi for calculations of scalp and skull defects. After this
exclusion, 56% of patients had scalp defects and 21% had skull defects.

Bamforth et al. (1994) reported AOS in a mother and her 3 children with
variable scalp defects and limb defects. Other anomalies included
congenital heart disease, microcephaly, epilepsy, mental retardation,
arhinencephaly, hydrocephaly, anatomic bronchial anomalies, and renal
anomalies. The 3 children were by 2 different fathers.

Zapata et al. (1995) reported 2 patients with Adams-Oliver syndrome and
congenital cardiac malformations. A literature review demonstrated that
13.4% of individuals with this syndrome have congenital heart anomalies.

Pousti and Bartlett (1997) described cutis aplasia congenita in twin
boys born to a mother with a history of cutis aplasia. One of the
infants had associated distal limb anomalies and the other had cardiac
anomalies.

Lin et al. (1998) reported a mother with scalp ACC but normal digits,
who had heart sounds consistent with a bicuspid aortic valve. She had
twin boys with AOS and heart anomalies: the cardiac findings were
consistent with Shone complex in 1 twin and consisted of bicuspid aortic
valve and patent ductus arteriosus in the other. Lin et al. (1998)
reported a second family in which the proband was a 3.5-year-old girl
with AOS and bicuspid aortic valve, whose father had AOS consisting of
ACC and small distal fingertips and fingernails; her sister and paternal
grandfather reportedly also had mild AOS features with ACC and digital
hypoplasia. Lin et al. (1998) reviewed published cases of AOS and stated
that approximately 20% have associated cardiovascular malformations,
frequently involving obstructive lesions on the left side of the heart.

Swartz et al. (1999) reported a 4-year-old girl with AOS who also had
double-outlet right ventricle, pulmonary hypertension, and portal
hypertension resulting from hepatoportal sclerosis.

Keymolen et al. (1999) reported a girl with congenital scalp and acral
reduction limb defects, consistent with the diagnosis of Adams-Oliver
syndrome, who also showed constriction rings, making the limb anomalies
similar to those seen in the amniotic band disruption sequence (217100).
The report was further evidence that the Adams-Oliver syndrome may be a
vascular disruption sequence.

Savarirayan et al. (1999) described a boy with AOS whose sister was also
mildly affected. Their mother had hypoplastic fifth toenails, thought to
represent very mild expression of the syndrome. Computed tomography of
the brain to investigate mild left hemiparesis in the boy demonstrated
severe cortical dysplasia of central, occipital, and anterior regions of
the right cerebral hemisphere. The boy and his sister had apparent
constriction rings present on the toes.

Pereira-da-Silva et al. (2000) described 2 patients with AOS, one of
whom had necrotic lesions of the fingertips, generalized cutis marmorata
telangiectatica, and localized ulceration of the abdominal skin,
indicative of a vascular abnormality.

Patel et al. (2004) described 2 children with AOS and additional
features, including intrauterine growth retardation, CMTC, pulmonary
hypertension, intracranial densities (shown in 1 patient to be sites of
active bleeding), and osteopenia. Patel et al. (2004) concluded that the
2 patients they described, in addition to those reported by Toriello et
al. (1988) and Swartz et al. (1999), established that a subset of AOS
patients is at high risk for pulmonary hypertension.

Maniscalco et al. (2005) reported a father and son with AOS and
pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs). Manifestations of AOS in
this 3-generation family included scalp defect, digital hypoplasia
and/or syndactyly, and cutis marmorata telangiectasia. The authors
suggested that the occurrence of PAVM in AOS supported the hypothesis
that endothelial-specific abnormalities could be the pathophysiologic
mechanism for the development of AOS.

Rodrigues (2007) reported a family in which 4 individuals spanning 4
generations had aplasia cutis congenita and congenital heart lesions. In
addition, affected individuals had craniofacial abnormalities associated
with frontonasal cysts. The proband presented at age 9 days with a
midline frontal cyst between the eyebrows. She also had small C-shaped
ears, prominent nasal bridge, and a V-shaped gingival notch. Other
features included brachydactyly and ventricular septal defect. The
proband's mother and grandmother had similar features and a maternal
grandfather was reportedly affected. None of the affected members had
neurologic or mental impairment.

Snape et al. (2009) described 3 cases of AOS and provided a detailed
review of the available literature, with tabulation of the clinical
features of all reported AOS dominant and recessive families as well as
sporadic patients.

Papadopoulou et al. (2008) reported a 14-month-old boy with aplasia
cutis congenita, distal limb transverse defects, growth retardation, and
a wide atrial septal defect. Central nervous system abnormalities
included central hypotonia, small corpus callosum, and developmental
delay. MRI showed periventricular leukomalacia and enlarged ventricles.
Fetal MRI at 26 weeks' gestation had shown bilateral dilatation of
lateral ventricles and periventricular cysts at the site of the
postnatal lesions, as well as a hypoplastic corpus callosum. The
patient's father and paternal grandfather also had aplasia cutis
congenita without mental defect or other anomalies. The antenatal and
postnatal MRI findings suggested to the authors that this patient's
periventricular leukomalacia may represent an unusual congenital feature
of AOS, possibly due to vascular disruption and decreased perfusion
during critical periods of fetal brain development.

Citing previous studies that have shown the possible association between
ACC of the scalp and various congenital heart defects, including patent
ductus arteriosus (Deeken and Caplan, 1970) and ventricular septal
defect (Dubosson and Schneider, 1978), and noting that such congenital
heart defects occur in approximately 20% of AOS patients (Lin et al.,
1998), Digilio et al. (2008) proposed that variability in clinical
expression of AOS might include the association of congenital heart
defect and ACC without limb defects. Digilio et al. (2008) pointed to
families in which some members exhibit classic AOS and other members
have only ACC and congenital heart defect (Santos et al., 1989; Lin et
al., 1998) to substantiate their hypothesis.

INHERITANCE

Bonafede and Beighton (1979) reported a family in which 9 members
spanning 4 generations had congenital scalp defects associated with
abnormalities of the hands and feet. Circumscribed defects of the skull
were an inconsistent finding. Inheritance was clearly autosomal
dominant, with one instance of male-to-male transmission.

Sybert (1989) concluded that ACC in association with limb defects is
most often inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

PATHOGENESIS

Toriello et al. (1988) suggested that the vascular changes in the skin
may indicate that features of Adams-Oliver syndrome result from vascular
disruption sequences. Jaeggi et al. (1990) also noted that cutis
marmorata and dilated scalp veins in AOS suggested a probable vascular
disruptive pathogenesis.

Der Kaloustian et al. (1991) described 2 families having members
affected with the Poland anomalad (173800) and AOS. They hypothesized
that the Poland anomalad and AOS result from the interruption of early
embryonic blood supply in the subclavian arteries, and that the gene
predisposing to this interruption follows an autosomal dominant pattern
of inheritance. Hoyme et al. (1992) reported that 2 additional
individuals in family 2 of Der Kaloustian et al. (1991) had the Poland
sequence with no findings of Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Swartz et al. (1999) suggested that AOS should be considered not merely
a syndrome consisting of aplasia cutis congenita and terminal transverse
limb defects, but rather a constellation of clinical findings resulting
from an early embryonic vascular abnormality.

Postmortem examination of an AOS patient with pulmonary hypertension
reported by Patel et al. (2004) showed defective vascular smooth muscle
cell/pericyte coverage of the vasculature associated with 2 blood vessel
abnormalities. Pericyte absence correlated with vessel dilatation
whereas hyperproliferation of pericytes correlated with vessel stenosis.
These findings suggested a unifying pathogenic mechanism for the
abnormalities seen in AOS.

MAPPING

Southgate et al. (2011) performed a genomewide screen in 22 members of 2
multigenerational families segregating autosomal dominant Adams-Oliver
syndrome, originally reported by Bonafede and Beighton (1979) and
Verdyck et al. (2006), respectively, and identified a locus for the
disease on chromosome 3q13.31-q13.33. Fine mapping defined a 5.53-Mb
critical interval flanked by markers dbSNP rs714697 and D3S4523. A
maximum multipoint lod score of 4.93 was obtained at marker dbSNP
rs1464311.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Verdyck et al. (2006) presented a Belgian family in which 10 individuals
over 4 generations had Adams-Oliver syndrome, 6 of whom were available
for study. Clinical symptoms were variable, as reported in other
families, and included large areas of alopecia on the vertex of the
skull and serious limb reduction defects with agenesis of all toes of 1
foot. Molecular analysis excluded mutations in the MSX1 (142983), CART1
(601527), P63 (603273), RUNX2 (600211), and HOXD13 (142989) genes.

In 2 families with congenital scalp defects and distal limb reduction
anomalies mapping to chromosome 3q13, originally reported by Bonafede
and Beighton (1979) and Verdyck et al. (2006), respectively, Southgate
et al. (2011) sequenced 4 candidate genes and identified heterozygosity
for 2 different truncating mutations in the ARHGAP31 gene (610911.0001
and 610911.0002, respectively) that segregated with disease in each
family. Sequencing of ARHGAP31 in 3 additional multiplex AOS kindreds as
well as 43 sporadic patients with features of aplasia cutis congenita
and/or terminal transverse limb defects revealed no mutations.

*FIELD* SA
Burton et al. (1976); Fryns  (1987); McMurray et al. (1977); Orstavik
et al. (1995)
*FIELD* RF
1. Adams, F. H.; Oliver, C. P.: Hereditary deformities in man due
to arrested development. J. Hered. 36: 3-7, 1945.

2. Bamforth, J. S.; Kaurah, P.; Byrne, J.; Ferreira, P.: Adams Oliver
syndrome: a family with extreme variability in clinical expression. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 49: 393-396, 1994.

3. Bonafede, R. P.; Beighton, P.: Autosomal dominant inheritance
of scalp defects with ectrodactyly. Am. J. Med. Genet. 3: 35-41,
1979.

4. Burton, B. K.; Hauser, L.; Nadler, H. L.: Congenital scalp defects
with distal limb anomalies: report of a family. J. Med. Genet. 13:
466-468, 1976.

5. Chitayat, D.; Meunier, C.; Hodgkinson, K. A.; Robb, L.; Azouz,
M.: Acrania: a manifestation of the Adams-Oliver syndrome. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 44: 562-566, 1992.

6. Dallapiccola, B.; Giannotti, A.; Marino, B.; Digilio, C.; Obregon,
G.: Familial aplasia cutis congenita and coarctation of the aorta. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 43: 762-763, 1992.

7. David, A.; Roze, J.-C.; Melon-David, V.: Adams-Oliver syndrome
associated with congenital heart defect: not a coincidence. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 40: 126-127, 1991.

8. Deeken, J. H.; Caplan, R. M.: Aplasia cutis congenita. Arch.
Derm. 102: 386-389, 1970.

9. Der Kaloustian, V. M.; Hoyme, H. E.; Hogg, H.; Entin, M. A.; Guttmacher,
A. E.: Possible common pathogenetic mechanisms for Poland sequence
and Adams-Oliver syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 38: 69-73, 1991.

10. Digilio, M. C.; Marino, B.; Dallapiccola, B.: Autosomal dominant
inheritance of aplasia cutis congenita and congenital heart defect:
a possible link to the Adams-Oliver syndrome. (Letter) Am. J. Med.
Genet. 146A: 2842-2844, 2008.

11. Dubosson, J.-D.; Schneider, P.: Manifestation familiale d'une
aplasie cutanee circonscrite du vertex (ACCV), associee dans un cas
a une malformation cardiaque. J. Genet. Hum. 26: 351-365, 1978.

12. Farrell, S. A.; Warda, L. J.; LaFlair, P.; Szymonowicz, W.: Adams-Oliver
syndrome: a case with juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia and chylothorax. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 47: 1175-1179, 1993.

13. Frieden, I.: Aplasia cutis congenita: a clinical review and proposal
for classification. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 14: 646-660, 1986.

14. Fryns, J. P.: Congenital scalp defects with distal limb reduction
anomalies. J. Med. Genet. 24: 493-496, 1987.

15. Fryns, J. P.; de Cock, P.; van den Berghe, H.: Occipital scalp
defect associated with valvular pulmonary stenosis: a new entity? Clin.
Genet. 42: 97-99, 1992.

16. Hoyme, H. E.; Entin, M. A.; Der Kaloustian, V. M.; Hogg, H.; Guttmacher,
A. E.: Possible common pathogenetic mechanisms for Poland sequence
and Adams-Oliver syndrome: an additional clinical observation. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 42: 398-399, 1992.

17. Ishikiriyama, S.; Kaou, B.; Udagawa, A.; Niwa, K.: Congenital
heart defect in a Japanese girl with Adams-Oliver syndrome: one of
the most important complications. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 43:
900-901, 1992.

18. Jaeggi, E.; Kind, C.; Morger, R.: Congenital scalp and skull
defects with terminal transverse limb anomalies (Adams-Oliver syndrome):
report of three additional cases. Europ. J. Pediat. 149: 565-566,
1990.

19. Keymolen, K.; De Smet, L.; Bracke, P., Fryns, J. P.: The concurrence
of ring constrictions in Adams-Oliver syndrome: additional evidence
for vascular disruption as common pathogenetic mechanism. Genet.
Counsel. 10: 295-300, 1999.

20. Kuster, W.; Lenz, W.; Kaariainen, H.; Majewski, F.: Congenital
scalp defects with distal limb anomalies (Adams-Oliver syndrome):
report of ten cases and review of the literature. Am. J. Med. Genet. 31:
99-115, 1988.

21. Lin, A. E.; Westgate, M.-N.; van der Velde, M. E.; Lacro, R. V.;
Holmes, L. B.: Adams-Oliver syndrome associated with cardiovascular
malformations. Clin. Dysmorph. 7: 235-241, 1998.

22. Maniscalco, M.; Zedda, A.; Faraone, S.; de Laurentiis, G.; Verde,
R.; Molese, V.; Lapiccirella, G.; Sofia, M.: Association of Adams-Oliver
syndrome with pulmonary arterio-venous malformation in the same family:
a further support to the vascular hypothesis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 136A:
269-274, 2005.

23. McMurray, B. R.; Martin, L. W.; Dignan, P. S. J.; Fogelson, M.
H.: Hereditary aplasia cutis congenita and associated defects: three
instances in one family and a survey of reported cases. Clin. Pediat. 16:
610-614, 1977.

24. Orstavik, K. H.; Stromme, P.; Spetalen, S.; Flage, T.; Westvik,
J.; Vesterhus, P.; Skjeldal, O.: Aplasia cutis congenita associated
with limb, eye, and brain anomalies in sibs: a variant of the Adams-Oliver
syndrome? Am. J. Med. Genet. 59: 92-95, 1995.

25. Paltzik, R. L.; Aiello, A. M.: Aplasia cutis congenita associated
with valvular heart disease. Cutis 36: 57-58, 1985.

26. Papadopoulou, E.; Sifakis, S.; Raissaki, M.; Germanakis, I.; Kalmanti,
M.: Antenatal and postnatal evidence of periventricular leukomalacia
as a further indication of vascular disruption in Adams-Oliver syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2545-2550, 2008.

27. Patel, M. S.; Taylor, G. P.; Bharya, S.; Al-Sanna'a, N.; Adatia,
I.; Chitayat, D.; Lewis, M. E. S.; Human, D. G.: Abnormal pericyte
recruitment as a cause for pulmonary hypertension in Adams-Oliver
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 129A: 294-299, 2004.

28. Pereira-da-Silva, L.; Leal, F.; Santos, G. C.; Amaral, J. M. V.;
Feijoo, M. J.: Clinical evidence of vascular abnormalities at birth
in Adams-Oliver syndrome: report of two further cases. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 94: 75-76, 2000.

29. Pousti, T. J.; Bartlett, R. A.: Adams-Oliver syndrome: genetics
and associated anomalies of cutis aplasia. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 100:
1491-1496, 1997.

30. Rodrigues, R. G.: Aplasia cutis congenita, congenital heart lesions,
and frontonasal cysts in four successive generations. Clin. Genet. 71:
558-560, 2007.

31. Santos, H.; Cordeiro, I.; Menezes, I.: Aplasia cutis congenita
associated with congenital heart defect, not a coincidence? (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 34: 614-615, 1989.

32. Savarirayan, R.; Thompson, E. M.; Abbott, K. J.; Moore, M. H.
: Cerebral cortical dysplasia and digital constriction rings in Adams-Oliver
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 86: 15-19, 1999.

33. Scribanu, N.; Temtamy, S. A.: Syndrome of aplasia cutis congenita
with terminal transverse defects of limbs. J. Pediat. 87: 79-82,
1975.

34. Snape, K. M. G.; Ruddy, D.; Zenker, M.; Wuyts, W.; Whiteford,
M.; Johnson, D.; Lam, W.; Trembath, R. C.: The spectra of clinical
phenotypes in aplasia cutis congenita and terminal transverse limb
defects. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1860-1881, 2009.

35. Southgate, L.; Machado, R. D.; Snape, K. M.; Primeau, M.; Dafou,
D.; Ruddy, D. M.; Branney, P. A.; Fisher, M.; Lee, G. J.; Simpson,
M. A.; He, Y.; Bradshaw, T. Y.; and 9 others: Gain-of-function
mutations of ARHGAP31, a Cdc42/Rac1 GTPase regulator, cause syndromic
cutis aplasia and limb anomalies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 574-585,
2011.

36. Swartz, E. N.; Sanatani, S.; Sandor, G. G. S.; Schreiber, R. A.
: Vascular abnormalities in Adams-Oliver syndrome: cause or effect? Am.
J. Med. Genet. 82: 49-52, 1999.

37. Sybert, V. P.: Aplasia cutis congenita: a report of 12 new families
and review of the literature. Pediat. Derm. 3: 1-14, 1985.

38. Sybert, V. P.: Congenital scalp defects with distal limb anomalies
(Adams-Oliver Syndrome--McKusick 10030): further suggestion of autosomal
recessive inheritance. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 32: 266-267,
1989.

39. Toriello, H. V.; Graff, R. G.; Florentine, M. F.; Lacina, S.;
Moore, W. D.: Scalp and limb defects with cutis marmorata telangiectatica
congenita: Adams-Oliver syndrome? Am. J. Med. Genet. 29: 269-276,
1988.

40. Verdyck, P.; Blaumeiser, B.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Van Hul, W.;
Wuyts, W.: Adams-Oliver syndrome: clinical description of a four-generation
family and exclusion of five candidate genes. Clin. Genet. 69: 86-92,
2006.

41. Whitley, C. B.; Gorlin, R. J.: Adams-Oliver syndrome revisited. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 40: 319-326, 1991.

42. Zapata, H. H.; Sletten, L. J.; Pierpont, M. E. M.: Congenital
cardiac malformations in Adams-Oliver syndrome. Clin. Genet. 47:
80-84, 1995.

*FIELD* CS
INHERITANCE:
   Autosomal dominant

HEAD AND NECK:
   [Head];
   Microcephaly;
   Aplasia cutis congenita over parietal area;
   [Eyes];
   Esotropia;
   Microphthalmia;
   [Mouth];
   Cleft lip;
   Cleft palate

CARDIOVASCULAR:
   [Heart];
   Congenital heart defects (in some patients);
   Ventricular septal defect;
   Atrial septal defect;
   Pulmonary valve stenosis;
   Tetralogy of Fallot;
   [Vascular];
   Pulmonary artery stenosis;
   Pulmonary hypertension;
   Vascular malformations

CHEST:
   [External features];
   Poland sequence;
   [Breasts];
   Accessory nipples

GENITOURINARY:
   [Internal genitalia, female];
   Imperforate vaginal hymen

SKELETAL:
   [Skull];
   Skull defect at vertex;
   [Limbs];
   Terminal transverse defects, asymmetric (minimal to absence of a limb);
   [Hands];
   Brachydactyly;
   Syndactyly;
   [Feet];
   Syndactyly;
   Malformed toes;
   Talipes equinovarus

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
   [Skin];
   Aplasia cutis congenita over posterior parietal area;
   Aplasia cutis congenita on trunk or limbs;
   Cutis marmorata;
   Thin, hyperpigmented skin;
   Dilated scalp veins radiating from periphery of scalp defect;
   [Nails];
   Hypoplastic nails;
   [Hair];
   Single-multiple round-oval areas of alopecia in parietal area

NEUROLOGIC:
   [Central nervous system];
   Encephalocele (uncommon);
   Mental retardation (uncommon);
   Developmental delay;
   Seizures;
   Hypotonia;
   Enlarged ventricles;
   Periventricular calcifications;
   Periventricular leukomalacia (reported in 2 patients);
   Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum;
   Cortical dysplasia;
   Pachygyria;
   Polymicrogyria

MISCELLANEOUS:
   Variable phenotype;
   Phenotype is classically defined as aplasia cutis and transverse limb
   defects

*FIELD* CN
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/25/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/12/2007
Kelly A. Przylepa - revised: 3/18/2002

*FIELD* CD
John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

*FIELD* ED
joanna: 12/28/2011
joanna: 5/28/2009
ckniffin: 4/15/2009
joanna: 8/27/2008
joanna: 3/14/2008
ckniffin: 2/25/2008
joanna: 8/30/2007
ckniffin: 7/12/2007
joanna: 3/18/2002

*FIELD* CN
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/7/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/9/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/26/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/1/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/31/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/20/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/25/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 7/16/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/12/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/21/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/1998
Iosif W. Lurie - updated: 8/12/1996

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
carol: 09/10/2012
terry: 9/7/2012
carol: 10/14/2011
carol: 9/9/2011
wwang: 6/10/2011
carol: 5/26/2011
terry: 5/26/2011
wwang: 10/7/2010
ckniffin: 10/1/2010
wwang: 9/28/2010
carol: 9/2/2009
terry: 8/31/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
ckniffin: 4/20/2009
wwang: 4/16/2009
ckniffin: 2/13/2009
carol: 9/19/2008
wwang: 3/13/2008
ckniffin: 2/25/2008
carol: 7/16/2007
ckniffin: 7/12/2007
alopez: 3/14/2006
terry: 3/7/2006
wwang: 10/25/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
ckniffin: 10/12/2005
wwang: 10/11/2005
terry: 9/21/2005
tkritzer: 9/24/2004
terry: 9/22/2004
mgross: 3/17/2004
carol: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 2/1/2000
mcapotos: 1/31/2000
terry: 1/14/2000
terry: 11/24/1999
jlewis: 9/23/1999
terry: 9/1/1999
terry: 4/29/1999
carol: 1/19/1999
terry: 1/12/1999
carol: 12/30/1998
terry: 12/21/1998
mark: 2/26/1998
terry: 2/26/1998
carol: 6/3/1997
carol: 8/12/1996
mark: 6/8/1995
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 3/7/1994
carol: 12/18/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100500
*FIELD* TI
^100500 MOVED TO 200150
*FIELD* TX
This entry was incorporated into 200150 on March 2, 2004.

*FIELD* CN
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 2/25/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2002
Orest Hurko - updated: 4/6/1998
Orest Hurko - updated: 4/1/1996
*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986
*FIELD* ED
carol: 03/02/2004
ckniffin: 3/2/2004
carol: 2/25/2004
ckniffin: 2/25/2004
ckniffin: 1/28/2004
alopez: 6/12/2002
terry: 6/4/2002
terry: 6/1/1998
terry: 4/6/1998
terry: 4/15/1996
mark: 4/1/1996
terry: 4/1/1996
terry: 2/15/1996
carol: 12/12/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 3/10/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/23/1990
*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100600
*FIELD* TI
%100600 ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
*FIELD* TX

CLINICAL FEATURES

Acanthosis nigricans consists of thickening and hyperpigmentation of the
skin of the entire body but especially in flexural areas. In an affected
mother and daughter reported by Tasjian and Jarratt (1984), skin lesions
were first noted in infancy.

Chuang et al. (1995) reported familial acanthosis nigricans affecting a
35-year-old woman, her 7-year-old son, and 5-year-old daughter. Absence
of the eyebrows and eyelashes was also present in the affected members
of this family. The mother had no axillary hair and her pubic hair was
sparse. The boy also suffered from congenital heart disease and a
congenital cataract in the left eye. Chuang et al. (1995) suggested that
the combination of acanthosis nigricans and ectodermal defects in this
family may represent a distinct nosologic entity. They referred to the
hair problem as madarosis (loss of the eyebrows or of the eyelashes).

INHERITANCE

In 26 patients with malignant acanthosis nigricans (secondary to
visceral carcinoma), Curth and Aschner (1959) found no other affected
persons in the family. However, they identified families with benign
acanthosis nigricans in successive generations, 3 in 1 family and 2 in 2
others, including instances of male-to-male transmission.

Jung et al. (1965) observed affected mother and daughter.

Lawrence et al. (1971) described a patient with acanthosis nigricans
inherited from the father and telangiectasia (187300) inherited from the
mother.

Using data from 397 participants from 2 Mexican-American family studies,
Burke et al. (2000) investigated the heritability of acanthosis
nigricans and its genetic correlation with other diabetes risk factors.
They examined acanthosis nigricans as both a continuous trait and a
dichotomous trait by means of a previously described validated scale.
The results indicated that the heritability for the condition, when
examined as a continuous trait, was high (0.58 +/- 0.10) and
statistically significant (P less than 0.001). The heritability as a
dichotomous trait was estimated to be moderate (0.23 +/- 0.05) and was
also significant (P = 0.018). The additive genetic correlations between
acanthosis nigricans and type 2 diabetes and its risk factors, including
body mass index and fasting insulin, were high or moderately high and
statistically significant. The random environmental correlations, by
contrast, were low and statistically insignificant. These data suggested
that genes that influence acanthosis nigricans have pleiotropic effects
on diabetes and its risk factors.

In addition to the association with insulin resistance (see 610549),
Seip syndrome (269700), and malignancy, acanthosis nigricans can be
drug-induced; nicotinic acid, diethylstilbestrol, oral contraceptives,
and exogenous glucocorticoids have been incriminated. Clear mendelian
inheritance is seen when acanthosis nigricans is part of syndromes,
e.g., Seip syndrome. Autosomal dominant acanthosis nigricans should be
studied for insulin resistance.

*FIELD* SA
Hermann  (1955); Seemanova et al. (1992)
*FIELD* RF
1. Burke, J. P.; Duggirala, R.; Hale, D. E.; Blangero, J.; Stern,
M. P.: Genetic basis of acanthosis nigricans in Mexican Americans
and its association with phenotypes related to type 2 diabetes. Hum.
Genet. 106: 467-472, 2000.

2. Chuang, S.-D.; Jee, S.-H.; Chiu, H.-C.; Chen, J.-S.; Lin, J.-T.
: Familial acanthosis nigricans with madarosis. Brit. J. Derm. 133:
104-108, 1995.

3. Curth, H. O.; Aschner, B. M.: Genetic studies on acanthosis nigricans. Arch.
Derm. 79: 55-66, 1959.

4. Hermann, H.: Zur Erbpathologie der Acanthosis nigricans. Z. Menschl.
Vererb. Konstitutionsl. 33: 193-202, 1955.

5. Jung, H. D.; Bruns, W.; Wulfert, P.; Mieler, W.: Ein Beitrag zum
Krankheitsbild der Acanthosis nigricans benigna familiaris. Dtsch.
Med. Wschr. 90: 1669-1673, 1965.

6. Lawrence, G.; Thurston, C.; Shultz, K.; Mengel, M. C.: Acanthosis
nigricans, telangiectasia and diabetes mellitus. Birth Defects Orig.
Art. Ser. VII(8): 322-323, 1971.

7. Seemanova, E.; Rudiger, H. W.; Dreyer, M.: Autosomal dominant
insulin resistance syndrome due to a postbinding defect. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 44: 705-712, 1992.

8. Tasjian, D.; Jarratt, M.: Familial acanthosis nigricans. Arch.
Derm. 120: 1351-1354, 1984.

*FIELD* CS

Skin:
   Benign acanthosis nigricans;
   Thick hyperpigmented flexural area skin

Inheritance:
   Autosomal dominant

*FIELD* CN
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/1998

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
carol: 04/10/2009
carol: 11/6/2006
alopez: 3/18/2004
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 6/27/2000
terry: 6/12/2000
alopez: 1/13/1998
dholmes: 12/24/1997
mark: 4/3/1997
mark: 10/13/1995
mimadm: 6/26/1994
carol: 3/12/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

*RECORD*
*FIELD* NO
100640
*FIELD* TI
*100640 ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 1 FAMILY, MEMBER A1; ALDH1A1
;;ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 1; ALDH1;;
ACETALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 1;;
ALDH, LIVER CYTOSOLIC;;
RETINAL DEHYDROGENASE 1; RALDH1
*FIELD* TX

DESCRIPTION

The ALDH1A1 gene encodes a liver cytosolic isoform of acetaldehyde
dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3), an enzyme involved in the major pathway of
alcohol metabolism after alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH, see 103700). See
also liver mitochondrial ALDH2 (100650), variation in which has been
implicated in different responses to alcohol ingestion.

ALDH1 is associated with a low Km for NAD, a high Km for acetaldehyde,
and is strongly inactivated by disulfiram. ALDH2 is associated with a
high Km for NAD, and low Km for acetaldehyde, and is insensitive to
inhibition by disulfiram (Hsu et al., 1985).

CLONING

Inoue et al. (1979) purified and partially characterized aldehyde
dehydrogenase from human erythrocytes: this was the cytosolic form,
present in only low concentration in red cells. Using isoelectric
focusing, Thomas et al. (1982) showed that the cytosolic and
mitochondrial ALDHs are distinct isozymes. Hempel et al. (1984)
determined the amino acid sequence of the cytosolic ALDH isoform. The
monomer is composed of 500 residues and contains 11 cysteine residues.

Hsu et al. (1985) reported cloning of the ALDH1 and ALDH2 genes. The 2
proteins showed 69% homology at the protein level. The ALDH1 gene
encodes a 501-residue protein (Hsu et al., 1989).

MAPPING

With cDNA probes for Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Hsu
et al. (1985, 1986) assigned the ALDH1 locus to chromosome 9q and the
ALDH2 locus to chromosome 12.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hsu et al. (1989) found that the ALDH1 gene is about 53 kb long and is
divided into 13 exons. A similar intron-exon organization was found in
ALDH2, which also has 13 exons with 9 of the 12 introns interrupting the
coding sequence at positions homologous to those in ALDH1. Thus, the 2
isozymes appear to have evolved after duplication of a common ancestral
gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Thomas et al. (1982) found low cytosolic ALDH in the liver of alcoholic
patients with fatty liver; mitochondrial ALDH was normal. Abstaining
alcoholics showed persistently low cytosolic ALDH.

Eckey et al. (1986) reported a variant of cytosolic ALDH in a Chinese
autopsy liver specimen. While the major isozyme band was nearly absent,
several additional minor bands were observed on isoelectric focusing
gel. Rabbit antibodies showed immunological cross-reactivity for the
variant enzyme bands. The existence of additional minor bands indicated
the presence of tetramer hybrid forms made up of normal and variant
monomers. The observed abnormality may represent a heterozygous form of
cytosolic ALDH variation. A similar variant was also detected in
erythrocytes of a male Thai student.

Yoshida et al. (1989) demonstrated that among Caucasians alcohol
flushing can be related to abnormalities of ALDH1. In 9 unrelated
Caucasian alcohol flushers, they found 1 who exhibited low activity
(10-20% of normal) and another who exhibited moderately low activity
(60%) and altered kinetic properties. The electrophoretic mobilities of
these 2 samples were not altered. Immunologic quantitation indicated
that the amount of protein in the 2 samples was not reduced in parallel
with the enzyme deficiency. In the first case, the daughter of the
proposita also had very low enzyme activity and alcohol flushing.

ANIMAL MODEL

Retinaldehyde is generated by ADH1 (103700) from retinol, and its
concentration is determined in large part by its subsequent catabolism
by RALDH1 to retinoic acid. Ziouzenkova et al. (2007) demonstrated that
retinaldehyde is present in rodent fat, binds retinol-binding proteins
(CRBP1, 180260; RBP4, 180250), and suppresses PPARG (601487) and
retinoid X receptor (see 180245) responses. Raldh1 -/- mice resisted
diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance and showed increased energy
dissipation. In ob/ob (see 164160) mice, administering retinaldehyde or
a Raldh inhibitor reduced fat and increased insulin sensitivity.
Ziouzenkova et al. (2007) concluded that retinaldehyde is a distinct
transcriptional regulator of the metabolic responses to a high-fat diet.

*FIELD* RF
1. Eckey, R.; Agarwal, D. P.; Saha, N.; Goedde, H. W.: Detection
and partial characterization of a variant form of cytosolic aldehyde
dehydrogenase isozyme. Hum. Genet. 72: 95-97, 1986.

2. Hempel, J.; von Bahr-Lindstrom, H.; Jornvall, H.: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
from human liver: primary structure of the cytoplasmic isoenzyme. Europ.
J. Biochem. 141: 21-35, 1984.

3. Hsu, L. C.; Chang, W.-C.; Yoshida, A.: Genomic structure of the
human cytosolic aldehyde dehydrogenase gene. Genomics 5: 857-865,
1989.

4. Hsu, L. C.; Tani, K.; Fujiyoshi, T.; Kurachi, K.; Yoshida, A.:
Cloning of cDNAs for human aldehyde dehydrogenases 1 and 2. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3771-3775, 1985.

5. Hsu, L. C.; Yoshida, A.; Mohandas, T.: Chromosomal assignment
of the genes for human aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 and aldehyde dehydrogenase-2. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 38: 641-648, 1986.

6. Inoue, K.; Nishimukai, H.; Yamasawa, K.: Purification and partial
characterization of aldehyde dehydrogenase from human erythrocytes. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 569: 117-123, 1979.

7. Thomas, M.; Halsall, S.; Peters, T. J.: Role of hepatic acetaldehyde
dehydrogenase in alcoholism: demonstration of persistent reduction
of cytosolic activity in abstaining patients. Lancet II: 1057-1059,
1982.

8. Yoshida, A.; Dave, V.; Ward, R. J.; Peters, T. J.: Cytosolic aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH1) variants found in alcohol flushers. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 53: 1-7, 1989.

9. Ziouzenkova, O.; Orasanu, G.; Sharlach, M.; Akiyama, T. E.; Berger,
J. P.; Viereck, J.; Hamilton, J. A.; Tang, G.; Dolnikowski, G. G.;
Vogel, S.; Duester, G.; Plutzky, J.: Retinaldehyde represses adipogenesis
and diet-induced obesity. Nature Med. 13: 695-702, 2007.

*FIELD* CN
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/2/2007

*FIELD* CD
Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

*FIELD* ED
ckniffin: 10/21/2009
terry: 1/7/2009
wwang: 7/5/2007
terry: 7/2/2007
alopez: 2/3/2006
mgross: 11/19/2001
carol: 4/3/2001
dkim: 7/17/1998
dkim: 6/26/1998
jenny: 7/2/1997
jenny: 7/1/1997
mimadm: 3/11/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/14/1989
carol: 11/2/1989

